The BSD Installer
written by Chris Pressey and Scott Ullrich

History
-------

The BSD Installer project started life on DragonFly BSD, and
although it still maintains close ties to DragonFly, it is now
a full-fledged project in its own right, used in other open-source
distributions such as FreeSBIE and pfSense.

Originally, DragonFly LiveCD's came only with a set of instructions
in a README file for manually installing DragonFly on your computer -
basically, formatting the hard drive appropriately, and then copying
the contents of the CD-ROM onto the hard drive.

This is a very useful and effective method, and one that is still
possible to perform even today, with DragonFly 1.2.  It provides
the most power and flexibility to the user doing the installation.

However, it also involves issuing a lot of commands, some of which
(like using disklabel to set up BSD partitions on the disk) are
fairly obscure.  Also, there are few safety measures - if you
accidentally type ad1s3 when you meant ad1s2, you could end up
overwriting your install of Windows NT without even a suggestion
from the computer that you are doing something dangerous.

For that reason, several members of the DragonFly community decided
that it would be nice to have something which was a little less
intimidating to people who have not mastered BSD disk systems,
and a little less nerve-wracking even for people who are.

When we started to search for solutions we where well aware of 
FreeBSD's 'sysinstall' program, which was inherited but not used by
DragonFly.  With the advent of a LiveCD as a install medium, it has been 
retired.  We were also well aware that sysinstall was starting to show
its age and wanted something that could be as simple and
straightforward as the good parts of sysinstall, while avoiding what we
saw as the bad parts of sysinstall altogether.  At the same time, we
wanted a code base that was easier to manage than sysinstall's.

So, the installer team started with the instructions listed in the
README and set about writing a system to automate them.

Design
------

One of the most prominent design constraints is that we did not want to
be tied down to one particular user interface.  Some people liked
the console-based interface of sysinstall, some preferred a web-based
frontend, while still others wanted a GUI, running perhaps under
X Windows.  In order to achieve this sort of radical interface
independence, a user interaction abstraction layer, called DFUI, was
established.  It reduced the complexities of interacting with the
user to an extremely small set of simple actions such as presenting a
form with some informative text, some fill-out fields, and some buttons.

Another design constraint which was present from the beginning was that
the system should be robust.  For this reason, we had the frontend
(user interface component) and backend (install logic component) of
the DFUI layer run in separate UNIX processes.  If one process crashes,
this does cause the other process to crash; in some instance, the
first process can even be restarted, and the user can pick up where they
left off.  (Ideally, of course, we want a system that never ever crashes
at all; but this is reality, and some concessions have be made.  Most of
all, we didn't want a failure mode that made the user reboot, as we
felt this was one sure way to discourage potential adopters.)

This approach extended to how the install logic itself worked.
At one point, we considered writing a library of C source code for
manipulating the user's hard drive, like sysinstall had.  However,
one of the nicer things about DragonFly's distribution is that it comes
on a LiveCD which boots into a real version of the operating system,
with all tools available.  We could, then, use these tools from the
installer, without having to rewrite anything.  As a bonus, they would
operate in separate UNIX processes, isolated from crashes; and being
standard BSD tools, the installation process would closely resemble the
instructions in the README, and (hopefully) be less mysterious to
anyone interested in how it works.

Features
--------

- Multiple protocol support
The BSD Installer supports  TCP/IP, Named Pipes or CAPS
(DragonFly specific protocol) for backend and frontend communication.

- NetBoot Installation Services

NetBoot allows for PXE Netbooting of hosts over the network.   With 
the flip of a button NetBoot installation services will configure
tftpd, nfs and dhcpd to allow for transparent booting from PXE over
the network.  The machine can launch the installer or use the LiveCD
normally.

- NCurses Installation
By default The BSD Installer uses a NCurses based text installer similar
to FreeBSD's sysinstall.  The NCurses based frontend is written in C.

- CGI Installation

The CGI Installer is written in C and uses THTTPD as its web server.
A number of custom "widgets" where created to help match LibDFUI
including a Add, Edit and Delete button helper.

- QT Based Installation

BSD Installer also features a QT Based frontend that can be used
with a Xorg or XFree equipped LiveCD.  Work is starting back up
to improve the appearance of the QT frontend but it is operational
as is at the moment.

- PFI (Pre-Flight Installer)

Pre-Flight Installer allows for the tweaking of the LiveCD
environment and Installer settings.   For example you can
stick a pfi.conf file on a removable media device and PFI
will automatically detect the file and make the necessary
changes.  Many items can be set using this method
including root passwords, ssh settings, installer frontends
and many other features.

Future
------

- Lua

The "new" version of BSD Installer is built on C libraries and Lua.
Lua is a great language that really allows for a lot of flexibility
and customizations by 3rd parties wishing to utilize BSD Installer
as the starting point for their project.  Work is actively ongoing
to finish the Lua based installer and its starting to really shape
up rapidly.  The Lua based backend will interface with the NCurses
, QT and CGI frontends as normal.

Distributions using BSD Installer
---------------------------------

Currently The BSD Installer is being used by DragonFlyBSD, FreeSBIE and
pfSense.
